@enumerate  

@item Which Git command should you run to retrieve a copy of your group's shared Pintos repository in your local directory? 
@tex 
  \hfill {\bf (1~mark)} 
@end tex

@item Why is using the strcpy() function to copy strings usually a bad idea?
(@dfn{Hint: identify the problem, give details and discuss possible solutions.}) 
@tex 
  \hfill {\bf (2~marks)}
@end tex

@item Explain how thread scheduling in Pintos currently works in less than 300 words. Include the chain of execution of function calls. 
(@dfn{Hint: we expect you to at least mention which functions participate in a context switch, how they interact, how and when the thread state is modified and the role of interrupts.})
@tex 
  \hfill {\bf (6~marks)}
@end tex

@item Explain the property of reproducibility and how the lack of reproducibility will affect debugging.
@tex 
  \hfill {\bf (2~marks)}
@end tex

@item How would you print an unsigned 64 bit @code{int}? 
(Consider that you are working with C99). Don't forget to state any inclusions needed by your code.
@tex 
  \hfill {\bf (2~marks)}
@end tex

@item Describe the data structures and functions that locks and semaphores in Pintos have in common. What extra property do locks have that semaphores do not?
@tex 
  \hfill {\bf (3~marks)}
@end tex

@item In Pintos, a thread is characterized by a struct and an execution stack. What are the limitations on the size of these data structures? Explain how this relates to stack overflow and how Pintos identifies it.
@tex
  \hfill {\bf (3~marks)}
@end tex

@item If test @file{src/tests/devices/alarm-multiple} fails, where would you find its output and result logs? Provide both paths and file names.
(@dfn{Hint : you might want to run this test to find out.})
@tex
  \hfill {\bf (1~mark)}
@end tex

@item 
Reimplement @code{timer_sleep()}, defined in '@code{devices/timer.c}’.
@tex
  \hfill {\bf (20~marks)}
@end tex

Although a working implementation of @code{timer_sleep} is provided, it "busy waits", that is, it spins in a loop checking the current time and calling @code{thread_yield()} until enough time has gone by. 
Reimplement it to avoid busy waiting (@b{10 marks}). 
Further instructions and hints can be found in the Pintos manual.

You also need to provide a design document which answers the following questions:  

@itemize @w{}
@item @b{Data Structures}

A1: (@b{2 marks}) Copy here the declaration of each new or changed `@code{struct}' or `@code{struct}' member, global or static variable, `@code{typedef}', or enumeration. Identify the purpose of each in 25 words or less.

@item @b{Algorithms}

A2: (@b{2 marks}) Briefly describe what happens in a call to @code{timer_sleep()}, including the actions performed by the timer interrupt handler on each timer tick.
 
A3: (@b{2 marks}) What steps are taken to minimize the amount of time spent in the timer interrupt handler?

@item @b{Synchronization}

A4: (@b{1 mark}) How are race conditions avoided when multiple threads call @code{timer_sleep()} simultaneously?

A5: (@b{1 mark}) How are race conditions avoided when a timer interrupt occurs during a call to @code{timer_sleep()}?

@item @b{Rationale}

A6: (@b{2 marks}) Why did you choose this design?  
In what ways is it superior to another design you considered?

@end itemize

@end enumerate
